This is going to be a pretty exciting video.
We are going to see how the gradient descent algorithm is implemented in Python, and we're going to
focus on gradient descent in one dimension, just because that makes the visualization easy.
It also makes the math easy, which means the code is easy.
And I'm also going to introduce you to two important parameters in deep learning.
This is the learning rate and the number of training epochs.
Now, I mentioned these two terms before when I told you about the algorithm for gradient descent,
but I didn't really talk about them.
And to be honest, I'm not going to talk about them in a huge amount of detail in this video either.
But you will get to see how important these parameters really are for deep learning.
And this demonstration of these two parameters, these meta parameters is going to help you appreciate
why gradient descent is not guaranteed to give the correct answer, or even a really good answer.
We're going to easily crash the gradient descent algorithm so that it doesn't give us a good answer
just by playing around with these two parameters here.
So our goal for gradient descent is going to be to find the minimum of this function.
So here's this function we can compute its derivative.
This is something we've seen before a couple videos ago I think it was two videos ago.
We talked about this here.
It was that screenshot just to remind you.
So now our goal is to empirically identify using the gradient descent algorithm, identify point five
or somewhere near point five as being the local minimum of this function.
Here I call it y.
Here I call it f of x.
Sorry, it's a little confusing, but this is the blue line shows this function.
The graph of this function and the orange line is its derivative.
Now we discovered, we computed analytically that the true minimum of this function is at x equals 0.5.
So we know that that has to be the right answer.
So now let's switch to Python and we will see how to implement gradient descent.
And we will explore whether gradient descent always gives us the correct answer.
We will use numpy and matplotlib.
Notice we're not using PyTorch.
That comes in later on in the course.
For now we're going to do everything manually.
Or at least you know, just with numpy and not with automatic functions using PyTorch.
This little bit of code here is basically just changing the figure format to make the figures look a
little bit nicer, makes them a little bit crisper.
In particular, it draws the figures in vector format instead of pixel format.
Okay, so here we have our function I'm creating a Python function for this mathematical function,
and it's pretty straightforward.
We just return the function itself.
And here is the derivative of the function for the derivative of this function.
So I'm computing these manually which is fine here.
Let us say I'm hard coding the function and its derivative here, which is fine because this is a relatively
simple function.
So let me see.
I have to run this code and run this cell.
Here I generate a plot.
So I'm going to evaluate the function and its derivative from minus two.
So values of x from minus two to plus 2 in 2001 steps okay.
So you see we're plotting x by the function and x by the derivative of the function.
So nothing too spectacular here.
It's exactly what it looks like in the slides okay.
So now here is our learning algorithm.
In fact this is the code that implements the gradient descent algorithm right here.
So we loop over the number of training epochs.
Here I specify this to be 100.
I'll talk more about this number in a few moments.
So we we loop over 100 training epochs.
And then we compute the gradient as the derivative of the function at our local minimum point.
And here is our local minimum point which we initialize as just a random guess.
And what we're doing with this code here.
This says numpy dot random.choice I input x comma one.
So this is from the vector x.
I'm just going to randomly select randomly choose one value out of the vector x.
And remember the vector x is just the the set of points that we are evaluating these functions on.
Okay, so we compute the gradient or the derivative of the function at our guess of the local minimum.
So we take a guess and then we redefine the local minimum.
Or we adjust the local minimum to be itself minus the learning rate times this gradient here that we
just computed.
And then we keep going through that 100 times the learning rate here.
As I mentioned previously in a couple a couple videos ago.
That's just that to be some small value here, I'm setting it to be 0.01.
We will explore in a little bit the effect of tuning up or tuning down this parameter here.
Okay.
So we can run through this code here.
And we see that we get a local minimum of 0.49.
Actually let me print out the first estimate of local min.
So now we're going to get that.
We're going to see printed out the first estimate and the final estimate after gradient descent after
our learning algorithm.
So we started off at -0.7.
And then we ended up at 0.497 here.
And this time, all that's unusual.
We got pretty much the same random starting value.
Let's try that again.
Okay, so you can see that the random starting value is all over the place.
It's minus something.
It's plus something.
It's close to zero.
It's far away from zero.
But this the estimate of the local minimum after running through this gradient descent algorithm is
not exactly the same.
I discussed this a few videos ago.
It's not giving us an exactly correct result, which we know from because it's a simple function, but
you can see it's pretty close to 0.5 all the time, sometimes a tiny bit over, tiny bit under whatever.
Okay, so now let's plot the results.
We plot the function again and its derivative again.
So this will produce the same plot as above.
And then this is going to plot the local minimum of x.
So the value of x where we have computed the local minimum, the empirical local minimum through gradient
descent and the derivative and at the function value.
In fact, this is a plot that you've also seen before in the slides.
Now, what I want to do next in the code is store the value of the local minimum at every single epoch.
So this loop here, this code here is gradient descent.
It's nearly the same as the gradient descent code that we just looked at.
You can see the main difference is that I'm creating this vector this matrix called model params.
So this is the model parameters.
And at each row during training I'm storing the guess of the local minimum and also the gradient or
the derivative at the local minimum.
Okay.
So I'm going to run through this code.
Otherwise this is the same gradient descent algorithm.
And now I'm going to make a plot of this.
So we're going to get two plots two subplots one showing the local minimum and how the local minimum
changes and the other one showing the derivative.
Okay.
So here we see that plot.
So you see that in this case we started off our gradient descent algorithm.
Initially guessed that the local minimum was 0.76 or whatever this point is.
And you can see that as learning progresses through 100 iterations, it's getting closer and closer
to the true value of 0.5.
And it's also pretty interesting to see that the steps it's taking is getting smaller on the y axis.
So the function value is getting closer and closer to the true value.
Here is the derivative.
Remember, the goal of the gradient descent algorithm is to move towards a derivative of zero.
And that's what you see happening here.
We start off with a large derivative.
It gets smaller and smaller and smaller and it's moving towards a derivative of zero.
Now once it gets very very close to zero Learning slows down.
It's there isn't that much to learn because the function is getting closer and closer to the minimum
value.
Now here we started positive.
It was just by chance.
So now the the curves are going down.
You can see they, they asymptotically approach the, the the true value here.
So I want to run this again.
And I hope this is going to go the other way.
Let's see.
I know it still started up.
I want to run this again until just randomly okay.
There you go.
So this should oh this is a pretty neat example actually.
The purely by chance the model ended up starting out.
It picked a value that was already really, really close to the final true minimum value.
So it started off being really, really accurate.
And so there actually wasn't all that much to learn.
But you can see here the derivative is negative.
So now it becomes positive.
It grows up towards zero.
All right.
Now what I would like to do is explore the effects of the these two parameters learning rate and the
number of training epochs.
So the learning rate is the value that scales the gradient as we update the local mean sorry, the local
minimum.
So the estimate of the local minimum of the function or the minimum of the function is itself minus
the derivative, and the derivative is scaled by the learning rate.
So first of all, let's see what happens if we just set this.
You know, if we turn the learning rate off which implicitly means just set this to one.
So let's see what kind of a value we get.
All right.
We get this value.
This initially looks like minus one.
But notice this scientific notation here.
This is E 70.
This is actually minus ten to the power of 70.
This is a ginormous galactic number.
Totally totally wrong okay.
And you know, we can we can run this over and over again.
It's never going to give a sensible result.
This is an absolutely huge magnitude negative number.
Absolutely ginormous.
Okay, let's try again making it smaller.
So before it was 0.01.
Now I'm going to try making it 0.001.
So let's see what we get there huh.
So we started off at 1.7 and then we ended up at 1.1.
Now we know the true answer is 0.5.
So it did get closer, but it didn't even get nearly there after 100 training epochs.
Let's try this again okay.
Here again, it was actually a pretty similar example.
Let's see.
Now we start at -0.3 and we get up to 0.06.
Let's you know to help us visualize what is what the problem is here.
Let's go down to this code where we can plot the gradient and the estimate of the function minimum over
the different iterations.
So now again I'm going to decrease the learning rate by a factor of ten.
So the learning rate is now 0.001.
Run this code.
And now we can see that the learning that the minimum is going in the right direction.
Right.
It's going to where it needs to be.
It needs to be at 0.5.
So it's approaching 0.5.
The derivative is getting larger.
So it started off being negative.
It needs to go to zero.
But it's taking really really really tiny steps.
So it's moving very very slowly.
It's not getting to the minimum within 100 epochs.
So just to you know put that in the context of this picture.
Let me see.
We started off at -0.25.
So we started off.
Our first random guess was here.
Now we know we have to go to the right of this function.
We have to increase x in order to increase the derivative to get the derivative to be zero.
Now when we set the learning rate to be really, really small.
We're taking really, really, really tiny steps.
So after 100 really, really, really tiny steps, we're not actually getting far enough.
We're only getting to I forget where it ended, but we're only getting to around here.
So now I want to try this again and see if we can keep the same learning rate but increase.
Uh, yeah, it was this one.
Increase the number of training epochs.
So now let's go for 1000 epochs.
Run this code again and run this cell again.
And now let's see okay so this is pretty cool.
So now we see that we actually do get to the a final reasonable result.
You can see the derivative goes up to zero.
And the local minimum is just about at 0.5.
Now you can see where we were before we stopped too early.
We stopped it at around 100 or exactly 100 iterations, which was around here in the learning process.
So what we've just discovered is that when the learning rate is smaller, you need more training epochs,
more iterations to get to the a good result.
Now let me be clear.
A learning rate of 0.001 and 1000 training epochs is not necessarily going to be the optimal set of
parameters for every single model, and for every single meta parameter and every single data set.
In fact, the optimal learning rate depends on the the flavor of the gradient descent algorithm and
also the flavor of back propagation and all sorts of other things.
How deep the model is many factors, but it certainly is the case that when you have a very, very small
learning rate, you need to have more iterations because the model is going to learn more slowly.
It's just going to take longer to get through learning.
So now that you have this code, I encourage you to play around with this code.
Spend some time with this code.
Change some things.
Explore around these different parameter settings and so on.
And just, you know, try to gain some intuition for what these dynamics look like after changing the
parameters.
Now this is the first code file in this course that has an A section called Additional Explorations.
So I've already talked about these additional explorations in the beginning of the course.
But I just want to give you a very quick reminder.
These are questions and suggestions that I made for you to explore this code more.
These are not things that I'm going to explicitly discuss here.
I don't have separate videos just about answering these questions.
In many cases, there are no right or wrong answers.
These are just my attempts at inspiring you to continue using this code to continue exploring and experimenting.
In this case, gradient descent, and deep learning in general to help you understand how deep learning
works, how you can apply it to new data, and how you can learn to be an experimental deep learning
data scientist.
So I definitely encourage you to go through these.
And if you make some great discoveries or if you find some really interesting results, feel free to
post your results to the Q&A forum.
I hope you enjoyed this video.
You learned how to implement the gradient descent algorithm in code for one dimension, and you also
got an introduction to some parameters of gradient descent, the learning rate, and the number of training
epochs.
And these become really important for, uh, for getting deep learning models to work.
You also saw that gradient descent can not give the correct results if the parameters of the model are
poorly specified.